docs: revise "how to run external codes" (#4208)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/codes.rst

*************************
How to run external codes
*************************
.. tip::

    Before starting to write a new plugin, check the `aiida plugin registry <https://aiidateam.github.io/aiida-registry/>`_.
    If a plugin for your code is already available, you can skip straight ahead to :ref:`running the code<how-to:codes:run>`.

To run an external code with AiiDA, you need a corresponding *calculation* plugin, which tells AiiDA how to:

1. Prepare the required input files
2. Run the code with the correct command line parameters

Finally, you will probably want a *parser* plugin, which tells AiiDA how to:

> 3. Parse the output of the code.

Reviewer: Inconsistent use of the period in the listing: either everywhere or nowhere

> This how-to takes you through the process of :ref:`creating a calculation plugin<how-to:codes:interfacing>` for a dummy executable that sums two numbers, using it to :ref:`run the code<how-to:codes:run>`, and :ref:`writing a parser <how-to:codes:parsing>` for its outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This how-to takes you through the process of :ref:`creating a calculation plugin<how-to:codes:interfacing>` for a very simple executable that sums two numbers, using it to :ref:`run the code<how-to:codes:run>`, and :ref:`writing a parser <how-to:codes:parsing>` for its outputs.
```
It is not actually a dummy executable since it performs the desired calculation.

Defining the spec
-----------------

The |define| method tells AiiDA which inputs the |CalcJob| expects and which outputs it produces (exit codes will be :ref:`discussed later<how-to:codes:parsing:errors>`).
This is done through an instance of the :py:class:`~aiida.engine.processes.process_spec.CalcJobProcessSpec` class, which is passed as the |spec| argument to the |define| method.
For example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddCalculation.define

The first line of the method calls the |define| method of the |CalcJob| parent class.
This necessary step defines the `inputs` and `outputs` that are common to all |CalcJob|'s.

Next, we use the :py:meth:`~plumpy.process_spec.ProcessSpec.input` method in order to define our two input numbers ``x`` and ``y`` (we support integers and floating point numbers), and we use :py:meth:`~plumpy.process_spec.ProcessSpec.output` to define an output of the calculation with label ``'sum'``.
Once a calculation finishes, any output node specified here will be linked to the calculation node with the specified link label.

.. tip::

>     In real-world plugins, popular types of input nodes are Python dictionaries (:py:class:`~aiida.orm.nodes.data.dict.Dict`) and files (:py:class:`~aiida.orm.nodes.data.singlefile.SinglefileData`).

Reviewer: I'm not quite sure what this tip is trying to tell me. Should I prefer those types?

Author: People go to this howto with the purpose of wrapping their own code, for which they will likely need Dict or SinglefileData input nodes.
This is just to give them an idea, happy to reformulate to make this more clear

Reviewer: I think a good formulation would be along the lines of "Consider to use x y, and z as input parameter types, that are used in many real world ..."

Finally, we set a couple of default ``options``, such as the name of the parser (which we will implement later), the name of input and output files, and the computational resources to use for such a calculation.
These ``options`` have already been defined on the |spec| by the ``super().define(spec)`` call, and they can be accessed through the :py:attr:`~plumpy.process_spec.ProcessSpec.inputs` attribute, which behaves like a dictionary.

.. note::

    One more important input required by any |CalcJob| is which external executable to use.
    External executables are represented by |Code|  instances that contain information about the computer they reside on, their path in the file system and more.

    They are passed to a |CalcJob| via the ``code`` input (defined in the |CalcJob| base class, so you don't have to)::

        spec.input('code', valid_type=orm.Code, help='The `Code` to use for this job.')

> Note that there is no ``return`` statement in ``define``: the ``define`` method directly modifies the |spec| object it receives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no ``return`` statement in ``define``: the ``define`` method directly modifies the |spec| object it receives.
```

For more details on setting up your `inputs` and `outputs` (covering validation, dynamic number of inputs, etc.) see the :ref:`Defining Processes <topics:processes:usage:defining>` topic.

Preparing for submission
------------------------

The :py:meth:`~aiida.engine.processes.calcjobs.calcjob.CalcJob.prepare_for_submission` method has two jobs:
Firstly, it creates the input files in the format the external code expects.
And secondly, it returns a :py:class:`~aiida.common.datastructures.CalcInfo` object that contains instructions for the AiiDA engine on how the code should be run.
For example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddCalculation.prepare_for_submission

.. note:: Unlike the |define| method, the ``prepare_for_submission`` method is implemented from scratch and so there is no super call.

> We start by writing our simple bash script that sums the two numbers ``x`` and ``y``, using Python's string interpolation to replace the ``x`` and ``y`` placeholders with the actual values ``self.inputs.x`` and ``self.inputs.y`` that were passed by the user.

Reviewer: I would prefer to avoid "tutorial-style" language in the how-tos. Any instructions that explicitly prompt the reader to follow along ("We start by...") should be reserved for the tutorial.

Author: So, replace by "Start by"?

Author: Anyhow, to some degree I think we do want the reader to follow along here, i.e. to write their first calcjob and parser using the example we provide.
I.e. this howto certainly does have some tutorial character.
However, we currently don't have a "tutorial" category in the docs, just an "introduction" category that contains the basic tutorial. 
I think we should probably leave this under "howto"

Reviewer: This is from the wiki about the how-to sections:
> The how-to guides should provide concrete steps, but do not have to be as detailed as a tutorial and further are not required to demonstrate a specific recipe from start to finish, meaning that there is some expectation that users are generally familiar with AiiDA.

So, yes, they can have some tutorial-character, but I would prefer to not give the impression that users are *expected* to follow along as they read them. That's obviously a very nuanced distinction, so happy to discuss, and we can even consider to change our guidelines regarding this if there is consensus.

3. Parse the output of the code.

This howto takes you through the process of :ref:`creating a calculation plugin<how-to:codes:interfacing>` for a dummy executable that sums two numbers, using it to :ref:`run the code<how-to:codes:run>`, and :ref:`writing a parser <how-to:codes:parsing>` for its outputs.

In the following, our |Code| will be the `bash` executable, and our "input file" will be a `bash` script ``aiida.in`` that sums two numbers and prints the result:

.. code-block:: bash

   echo $(( numx + numy ))

We will run this is as:

.. code-block:: bash

    /bin/bash < aiida.in > aiida.out

thus writing the sum of the two numbers ``numx`` and ``numy`` (provided by the user) to the output file ``aiida.out``.

.. _how-to:codes:interfacing:

.. todo::

    Add to preceding sentence: :ref:`the communication with external machines<how-to:codes:transport>` and the interaction with its :ref:`scheduling software<how-to:codes:scheduler>`.

Interfacing external codes
==========================

We start our ``calcjob.py`` script by subclassing the |CalcJob| class:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python

>     :lines: 10-18

Author: About the line numbers, I can also just copy-paste the code - just let me know.

However, I do disagree about the imports.
The purpose of this section is to get people started with their first calcjob and parser plugin.
In this context, figuring out predictable import errors is not time well spent, and we should save people this time when we can.

>     :lines: 10-18

Reviewer 2: Copy-pasting code has the same problem in that it won't be tested and so can break. I do see your point about the imports, but I would then prefer to move them in the methods where they are needed. This way we can use the current direct includes that are fully tested and they include all imports. For the first subclassing, we can then literally say: "Create a sublcass of `CalcJob` which you can import from `aiida.engine`."

This is done through an instance of :py:class:`~aiida.engine.processes.process_spec.CalcJobProcessSpec`, which, as can be seen in the snippet below, is passed as the |spec| argument to the |define| method.
For the code that adds up two numbers, we will need to define those numbers as inputs (let's call them ``x`` and ``y`` to label them) and the result as an output (``sum``).
The snippet below shows one potential implementation, as it is included in ``aiida-core``:
The |define| method tells AiiDA which inputs the |CalcJob| expects and which outputs it produces (exit codes will be :ref:`discussed later<how-to:codes:parsing:errors>`).
This is done through an instance of the :py:class:`~aiida.engine.processes.process_spec.CalcJobProcessSpec` class, which is passed as the |spec| argument to the |define| method.
For example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddCalculation.define

>     :dedent: 4

Author: Because people will (and should be able to) copy-paste it into their code.
Let's not make life harder unnecessarily

>     :dedent: 4

Reviewer 2: Well it makes it harder to read because it is unnecessarily indented. I would argue that is more of a burden than indenting the code once after you have copy pasted the snippet. Anyway, you will have to adapt the code and indenting all code once is a single click in any half-decent editor

>     :dedent: 4

Author: From my previous tutorial experience, the issue is that not everybody is actually using a decent editor - my main goal here is that I would like to receive zero questions about indentation of this code snippet during the tutorial.

However, you are of course right that indentation ends up hiding a few more characters.
Let's let a 3rd person decide @csadorf What do you say?

Just for reference, here is

NO INDENTATION
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1053245/86237600-5c890f80-bb9c-11ea-8552-7199ab3f8729.png)

INDENTATION
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1053245/86237744-a07c1480-bb9c-11ea-84dc-df7979b38849.png)

>     :dedent: 4

Reviewer: I vote against dedenting, because it is more correct and if folks have issues copy & pasting dedented code they will also have issues with figuring out the right detention. But might be worthwhile to record what caused more issues during the actual tutorial.

> Once a calculation finishes, any output node specified here will be attached to the calculation node with the label ``retrieved``.

Author: Thanks for catching this one (it was a bit too late when I did this revision ;-) ).
Will fix.

Preparing for submission
------------------------

The :py:meth:`~aiida.engine.processes.calcjobs.calcjob.CalcJob.prepare_for_submission` method is used for two purposes.
Firstly, it should create the input files, based on the input nodes passed to the calculation, in the format that the external code will expect.
Secondly, the method should create and return a :py:class:`~aiida.common.datastructures.CalcInfo` instance that contains various instructions for the engine on how the code should be run.
An example implementation, as shipped with ``aiida-core`` can be seen in the following snippet:
The :py:meth:`~aiida.engine.processes.calcjobs.calcjob.CalcJob.prepare_for_submission` method has two jobs:
Firstly, it creates the input files in the format the external code expects.
And secondly, it returns a :py:class:`~aiida.common.datastructures.CalcInfo` object that contains instructions for the AiiDA engine on how the code should be run.
For example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddCalculation.prepare_for_submission

>     :dedent: 4

Reviewer: see my comment above

>    That is why we used the key-notation in the ``define`` method.

Reviewer 2: I might have misunderstood what you are trying to say here, but the second part is incorrect. Note that the return type of `self.options` is an attribute dictionary of actual option values passed to the process and is completely different from ``spec.inputs['metadata']['options']`` which is a `PortNamespace`. The reason that we use key-notation in define is simply because the `PortNamespace` is not an attribute dict, unlike the return value of `self.options`. Note that there is *nothing to set* also in `prepare_for_submission`.

Author: Right, I now checked the old version of this and it just mentioned a short-hand notation; not the detail about ports etc. (which indeed should be explained in the `define` section, if any).
I will fix this.

> Finally, we pass the |CodeInfo| to a |CalcInfo| object (one CalcJob can involve more than one executable, so ``codes_info`` is a list).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, we pass the |CodeInfo| to a |CalcInfo| object (one calculation job can involve more than one executable, so ``codes_info`` is a list).
```

Parsing the output files produced by your code into AiiDA nodes is optional, but it can make your data queryable and therefore easier to access and analyze.

We start our ``parser.py`` plugin by subclassing the |Parser| class and implementing its :py:meth:`~aiida.parsers.parser.Parser.parse` method.

.. code-block:: python

    class ArithmeticAddParser(Parser):
        """Parser for an `ArithmeticAddCalculation` job."""

        def parse(self, **kwargs):
            """Parse the contents of the output files stored in the `retrieved` output node."""
            output_folder = self.retrieved

            with output_folder.open(self.node.get_option('output_filename'), 'r') as handle:
                result = int(handle.read())

>             self.out('sum', Int(result))

Reviewer 2: I see the point that you want to first show the minimal version without exit codes, but the downside of this method is that now the code is not tested. If we change anything to the code, this might easily get broken without us noticing. We should consider if this is worth the risk and if it is really that bad to not have the full version of the code. I think people are capable of overlooking the exit codes until we get to them a bit further on

Author: The alternative is that I also add this simple parser to the codebase and test it.

Author: I'm adding the code into the codebase + adding a test

  2. ``self.node``: The :py:class:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode` representing the finished calculation, which e.g. provides access to all of its inputs (``self.node.inputs``).

We start by opening the output file, whose filename we get from the ``self.node`` attribute via the :py:meth:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode.get_option` convenience method.

We read the content of the file and cast it to an integer, which should contain the sum that was produced by the ``bash`` code.

Finally, we use the :py:meth:`~aiida.parsers.parser.Parser.out` method to link the parsed sum as an output of the calculation.
The first argument is the name of the output, which will be used as the label for the link that connects the calculation and data node, and the second is the node that should be recorded as an output.
Note that the type of the output should match the type that is specified by the process specification of the corresponding |CalcJob|.
If any of the registered outputs do not match the specification, the calculation will be marked as failed.

> In order to request automatic parsing of a |CalcJob| (once it has finished), users can set the ``metadata.options.parser_name`` input when submitting the job.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to request automatic parsing of a |CalcJob| (once it has finished), users can set the ``metadata.options.parser_name`` input when launching the job.
```

> If a particular parser should *always* be used by default, the |CalcJob| ``define`` method can set a default value for the parser name as we did above:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a particular parser should *always* be used by default, the |CalcJob| ``define`` method can set a default value for the parser name as we did in the :ref:`previous section <how-to:codes:interfacing>`:
```

        ...
        spec.inputs['metadata']['options']['parser_name'].default = 'arithmetic.add'

Note, that we are not passing the |Parser| class itself, but an *entry point string* under which the parser class is registered.
How to register your parser class as an entry point is explained in the how-to section on :ref:`registering plugins <how-to:plugins>`.

.. _how-to:codes:parsing:errors:

Handling parsing errors
-----------------------

> So far, our we have not spent much attention on dealing with potential errors that can arise when running external codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So far, we have not spent much attention on dealing with potential errors that can arise when running external codes.
```

However, there are lots of ways in which codes can fail to execute nominally.

> A |Parser| can play an important role in detecting such errors and reporting them to AiiDA, where :ref:`workflows <how-to:workflows>` can then decide how to proceed further, e.g. by modifying input parameters and resubmitting the calculation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A |Parser| can play an important role in detecting such errors and reporting them to AiiDA, where :ref:`workflows <how-to:workflows>` can then decide how to proceed, e.g. by modifying input parameters and resubmitting the calculation.
```

Parsers communicate errors through :ref:`exit codes<topics:processes:concepts:exit_codes>`, which are defined in the |spec| of the |CalcJob| they parse.
Our :py:class:`~aiida.calculations.arithmetic.add.ArithmeticAddCalculation` example, defines the following exit codes:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: start exit codes
    :end-before: end exit codes
    :dedent: 8

Each ``exit_code`` defines

 * an exit status (a positive integer),
 * a label that can be used to reference the code in the |parse| method (through the ``self.exit_codes`` property, as shown below), and
 * a message that provides a more detailed description of the problem.

> In order to inform AiiDA about a failed calculation, simply return the corresponding exit codes in the ``parse`` method, when you detect the corresponding issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to inform AiiDA about a failed calculation, simply return from the ``parse`` method the exit code that corresponds to the detected issue.
```

Here is a more complete version of our |Parser|:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/parsers/plugins/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddParser

It checks:

 1. Whether a retrieved folder is present.
 2. Whether the output file can be read (whether ``read()`` will throw an ``OSError``).

> 

Reviewer 2: empty line?

Author: fixed!

    calculation_builder.metadata.store_provenance = False
    run(calculation_builder)

> This marks the end of this how-to, and you should now be fully equipped to wrap your own code in an AiiDA calculation plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Self-evident.

    calculation_builder.metadata.store_provenance = False
    run(calculation_builder)

> This marks the end of this how-to, and you should now be fully equipped to wrap your own code in an AiiDA plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This marks the end of this how-to, and you should now be fully equipped to wrap your own code in an AiiDA calculation plugin.
```

> For further reading, you may want to consult the :ref:`guidelines on plugin design <topics:plugins:guidelines>` or the how to on `packaging plugins <how-to:plugins>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For further reading, you may want to consult the :ref:`guidelines on plugin design <topics:plugins:guidelines>` or the how to on :ref:`packaging plugins <how-to:plugins>`.
```
